---
title: 'Introduction to Gaussian processes'
date: 2025-11-22
permalink: /posts/2025/11/introduction_to_gaussian_processes/
tags:
  - Gaussian process
  - Code
---



I have used Gaussian process and it being used extensively in fields such as astrophysics. They are very useful and flexible models that can be applied to timeseries data. However, I often find it difficult to explain a Gaussian process (GP) to a non-expert in a short amount of time. While it is easy to use many of the GP libaries available, wrapping you head around the theoretical concepts can be challenging. 

In this blog post, I will give an introduction to Gaussian processes to a non-expert who are interested in learning and using this stastical tool.

# Formulation

The formal definition of a Gaussian process is a model where your data is described by a multivariate Gaussian distribution. We define the mean $$\mu(x)$$ and the covariance $$\Sigma(x, x')$$ and write the Gaussian process as

$$f(x)~GP(\mu(x), \Sigma(x, x'))$$



# Kernels


# Code packages and examples

There is a wide variety of Gaussian process python libaries with different implementations. 

Here is the list of the code packages
- George: 
- Celerite: uses sums of complex-valued exponent as the kernel. This special kernel allows the computational cost of the GP to scale linearly with number of data points.
- tinygp: written in JAX.

# References
- Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning, Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams
The MIT Press, 2006. ISBN 0-262-18253-X.