---
title: 'How to be optimally wrong: understanding Kalman filters'
date: 2026-12-28
permalink: /posts/2026/03/kalman_filters_p1/
tags:
  - Bayesian inference
  - Kalman filters
  - Code
---


# The Problem

Let's say you are tracking a drone with a radar. You try to measure the position with the sensor, but the measurement is inaccurate and doesn't capture its true position. You have another approach, model the motion of the drone, but your model is not perfect, due to environmental factors such as wind. You now have two inperfect approaches, so how do you go about tracking the motion of a drone?

The Kalman filters solves this problem, by blending Bayesian updating with the interplace between you physical model and observations. 

# A high level overview of a Kalman filter

A Kalman filter is an algorithm that use measurements observed over time to predict the state of some physical object while incorporating model uncertainty and noisy measurements. This is done by performing Bayesian updating while weighting the predicted state from a physically motivated model and a measuremnt. These weights are determined by their uncertainty associated with each one. If the uncertainty from your measurement is huge compared to your predicted state, the Kalman filter will update mainly using the predicted state, not with your measurements. 

Kalman filtering was invented by Rudolf E. Kalman in 1960 (cite).  

The Kalman filtering algorithm can be summarised by 5 core equations:
1. Determine the predicted state at time k
$$\vec{x}_{k\vert k-1} =  F \dot \vec{x}_{k-1\vert k-1} + B \vec{u}_k$$
2. Determine the predicted covariance
$$\Sigma_{k|k-1} = F \dot \Sigma_{k-1|k-1} \dot F^{-1}$$


# Conclusion



# References

